So we're going to talk now about one of the most important philosophers of the 20th century,
certainly most important of the American philosophers, W. V. O. Willard Van Orman Quine.
He is an interesting figure. He sort of marks the transition from logical positivism into
post-positivism. In that, he has a lot of sympathies with the logical positivists. There
are some assumptions that the positivists had that he shares, and some would say that makes
his view archaic, because some of the things that he retains from logical positivism say
his critics, you shouldn't. They should be rejected. But at the same time, his view, and in
particular a very famous article, if you had to rank the top analytic philosophy articles of the
20th century, two dogmas of empiricism by W. V. O. Quine would be in the top five. It certainly
was seen as a huge bombshell and was cited and discussed massively in the years after its release
in the 50s. And in that paper, he basically attacks logical positivism. Now, reading that
paper is very difficult. Quine, in general, writes, I think, beautifully, but does not
write clearly. He writes as if his audience is very knowledgeable. It's like coming in
in the middle of a conversation, a very erudite conversation, and it's very easy to get lost.
And what also makes it hard is that Quine's whole philosophy is a big system. There are some
philosophical papers that just stand alone, that are talking about a specific topic and making
specific points about this specific topic. In fact, probably the majority of philosophy papers
in journals are like that. Whereas each of Quine's papers is just a small picture, a small window
onto a giant picture, which is his whole theory. And it's got all of these elements to hang
together. Probably the best thing to read to get his theory, or at least the theory, the most
famous version of the theory, is his 1960 book, Word and Object, which, of course, came after
two dogmas of empiricism, and perhaps goes even further down the road that two dogmas
went down. But he writes articles, he writes books, and they're all sort of little pieces
of this giant picture. The other thing that kind of makes him a distinctive figure about
the 20th century is that he stretched almost exactly the length of the 20th century. He
was born in 1908, died in 1999, I believe I'm right in saying, and was still publishing
up until the end. For example, this book Pursuit of Truth, which is more accessible than many
of his books, although it's a slim volume, was published in the early 90s, the second
edition I think 1992. And it's still beautifully written. I think I'm going to read you the
beginning sentence of this to give you some idea of, because it sort of hints at a lot
of the themes in Quine. From impacts on our sensory surfaces, we in our collective and
cumulative creativity down the generations have projected our systematic theory of the
external world. Our system is proving successful in predicting subsequent sensory input. How
have we done it? Okay, that hints at a lot of themes in Quine. One of them, and perhaps
the most important, is naturalism. Now for Quine, naturalism is the idea that there is
sort of a single theory of the world. There aren't really separate disciplines. So if
you do philosophy of science, there's a debate about whether or not the hard sciences are
doing something different in kind from the softer sciences. And is history a social science?
Are social sciences sciences? You get into all these debates and people draw lines and
so on. For Quine, it's much simpler than that. It's an overall theory of the world.
Now so it's a matter of decree. Philosophy isn't a separate thing. It's part of this
whole approach and the point of our total theory of the world is to work from inputs
to make predictions, to explain the inputs and to make predictions about future inputs.
And of course, this is something he shares with the logical positivists, a keenness for
science. The logical positivists, as I said, were writing in a time when Einstein was alive
and making new contributions, quantum mechanics, all that stuff. Incredibly exciting time where
science was making advances by leaps and bounds and it seemed to the logical positivists that
philosophy was kind of stultifying. It was stuck, it hadn't made progress. So that's why they came
up with their verificationist criterion of meaning that in order to be meaningful, something must
be, it must be clear what kind of sentences about the world, what kind of statements about the
world, facts about the world, contributes to its truth or falsity. So if nothing about the world
affects whether or not a sentence you're saying is true or false, then either, according to the
logical positivists, you're stating an analytic truth that is true in virtue of the meanings of
the words contained within, like all bachelors are unmarried, or you're stating nonsense. And as
we saw, the logical positivists thought that huge swathes of what had been counted respectable
academic discussion were in fact nonsense and bullshit and should be trashed. In this, they
were following David Hume, who'd made a very similar claim centuries before. But for example,
so to give an example, AJ Air, who was our sort of English language popularizer of logical
positivism, says that he's not an atheist, because an atheist believe that God does not exist is a
meaningful sentence, whereas he Air doesn't think that any talk of God is meaningful, because it
fails the verification standard, you cannot, there are no facts about the world that would refute,
that would affect either positively or negatively the truth of God exists. Okay, so part of the
positivist project rests on these distinctions that we've, we've come across before. There's a set of
pairs of distinctions that are have been seen as very significant down through the history of
Western philosophy. There's analytic versus synthetic. This is to do with meaning. And for
the logical positivists, as for thinkers before them, analytic sentences are ones that are true
million virtue of the words involved. And that, so for example, Air would say, experience is
relevant to the confirmation of individual synthetic statements, like grass is green, but
not analytic sentences, like all bachelors are unmarried. So, in other words, synthetic statements
are ones that are actually saying something about the world, because they can be verified or falsified
by facts about the world, whereas analytic statements are not. So, this kind of robbs analytic
statements of some significance, because they're like true by definition. Now, the positivists
didn't think that this was necessarily a bad thing, because they thought that math, all the
statements of math were analytic. And in fact, they said that what philosophy was doing was trying
to find interesting analytic truths. So, philosophers still had a job to do. Philosophy wasn't
nonsense, like theology, for example. But its role was limited to talking about analytic truths,
because the scientists were dealing with synthetic truths. Scientists had the best equipment for
testing the world and coming up with new claims about the world, like electrons exist or something
like that. So, there's this clean divide between sentences whose meaning is unaffected by facts
about the world, because its meaning is solely dependent on the words that make it up, true by
definition, and sentences that are actually meaningful, because they're saying something
about the world. This is the analytic synthetic distinction, and it is the first of the two
dogmas of empiricism that Quine is attacking. But notice, as I said, he actually agrees with the
positivists about a lot of things. For example, Quine is a huge fan of science. Science is perhaps
the most important part of this total theory of the world. But where he disagrees with the
logical positivists is this, in this idea that there's a clear dividing line. Here's science,
here's philosophy. Science is doing empirical stuff, philosophy is doing analytic stuff. And in
fact, because he denies that there's a distinction, Quine has interesting ideas about the way
philosophy should proceed. A famous work of his is called epistemology naturalized. Epistemology
is a branch of philosophy that typically has been concerned with questions of knowledge. That's
what epistemology is about. What can we know? And a lot of epistemology before Quine was devoted
to sort of analyzing the notion of knowledge. What is it to know something and coming up with a
definition of knowledge? Quine is not interested in that in tall. He says that epistemology should
be about sort of more nitty gritty issues like how it is that children learn a theory of the
world. It should be like a branch of science where we're studying how humans acquire information. So
it should be done like science. It is naturalized. In other words, it is a branch of what we would
normally call science. And part of that follows from him denying that there is a clear distinction
between analytic and synthetic. So that's one pair, analytic, synthetic. That's to do with,
that's a semantic distinction between how the meanings of sentences are determined. According
to the positivists with their verification standard, analytic sentences are not verified by
experience. They're true by definition. Synthetic sentences are verified by experience. Okay,
there are two other related distinctions. There's the a priori versus a posteriori. This is an
epistemological distinction. That is, so knowledge a priori is supposedly knowledge that you have
without any experience. Now, if you've taken an early modern class, you will notice that there's a
big divide between the empiricists like Locke, Barkley and Hume, who minimize the amount of a
priori truth to essentially nothing. They say we are born tabula rasa, which is Latin for blank
slate. We don't know anything. And everything we all the knowledge we have is we have to have
acquired by sensory inputs. So empiricism is the idea that the important knowledge comes from
experience comes from sensory inputs. Quine is an empiricist, even though he's talking about two
dogmas of empiricism, that doesn't mean that he's saying empiricism is what's bad. He's saying,
these things that empiricists have believed have held back empiricism. And in fact, we should get
rid of these dogmas and we will improve empiricism. So he's a big fan of empiricism. And that's clear
actually from that opening sentence that I just read you. I will read it to you again. He says,
from impacts on our sensory surfaces, we in our collective and cumulative creativity down the
generations have projected our systematic theory of the external world. So you know,
that's an empiricist statement. It says that where we get our information is impacts on our sensory
surfaces. So a priori versus a posteriori seems to be it's a different distinction than
analytic synthetic. Analytics synthetic is about meanings. A priori versus a posteriori is about
knowledge, how we can know things. But with some rare exceptions like Kant, they're taken to track
each other. So it was it was assumed that all a priori truths were at analytic truths and vice
versa. And the third distinction is sometimes called a metaphysical distinction. It's a fact
about the world. And it's a distinction between necessary and contingent. So a necessary truth
is one that cannot possibly be false. And a contingent truth is one that is in fact true,
but could be otherwise. So grass is green, of course, is is contingently true. It is true. But
there is no contradiction in imagining blue grass that that isn't a contradiction in terms. So you
can see that this is very close to the idea of analytic. A contradiction in terms is is how we
would explain the denying an analytic truth. Alright, so we've got these three pairs. Analytics
synthetic, a priori, a posteriori, and necessary and contingent. And the a post the synthetic,
a posteriori and contingent are taken to all overlap. And the analytic, a priori, and necessary
are taken to all overlap. But there has to be a distinction between them for the logical positive
ists project to go through, because they want to make this clear dividing line between sentences
that actually say stuff about the real world, and the kind of stuff that math and philosophy does.
It's still valuable, but it's different in kind from what natural science does. So these claims
are held by the logical positivists. The logical positivists actually make one further claim about
these three pairs of concepts. They claim that the most basic of the three pairs is the analytic
synthetic, and that you can explain the other two in terms of that. So all necessary and a
priori truths are analytic. An analytic, analyticity is needed to explain necessity. In other words,
so not only they're not just claiming that all three overlap, they're also claiming that one of
them is explanatorily prior. So analyticity is the key that explains, it's the foundation that
explains necessary and a priori. So if you believe that, then it better be the case that you can
give an account of analyticity that is independent of your account of necessity and a priori city,
because you're saying that what explains necessity and a priori city is analyticity. So you better
not do it in reverse, otherwise you're doing circular reasoning. And that is exactly what
Quine said is going on. Quine in the early sections of this paper, Two Dogmas of Empiricism,
actually says, okay, let's see if we can come up with the independent explanation of what it is to
be analytic that the positivists need in order to explain the other two and in order to make this
clear cut distinction. And he says, okay, analyticity, an analytic truth is one that, well,
an obvious example of an analytic truth, particularly if you're a big fan of logic, which
Quine was actually Quine wrote his dissertation on Russell and Whitehead's famous book,
Principia Mathematica, which is practically all logic. So Quine was a made contributions to
logic, and that's how he started out. So big fan of logic. He says, well, the best candidate for
analyticity is logical truth, because it's clear that P or not P is true by definition. That is,
P or not P is something that is true in all possible circumstances. Because if you assume as
Quine does and as logic, certainly the logic that he was dealing with does, that P has to be true
or false. Well, even if you don't know the truth of P, P has to be true or false, and not P has to
be the opposite. And in a disjunction, if one of them is true, then the whole thing is true. But in
P or not P, one of them has to be true, because P is either true, in which case, it's true and the
whole disjunction is true, or P is false, in which case not P is true, in which case the whole
disjunction is true. So that's known as a logical tautology, something that has to be true. If that's
what analyticity was, then we do have a coherent notion of it. But the trouble is that's a very
narrow set of sentences. And that doesn't include things like all bachelor's are unmarried, because
that's not P or not P. So for that to count as also like a logical truth, you need to be able to
translate statements like all bachelor's are unmarried into a logical truth, which it isn't so
far. All bachelor's are unmarried is not on its face a logical truth, a tautology. But you, if you
can translate it into one, then that logical truth or anything translatable into a logical truth
would be the kind of explanation of analyticity that the positivists could use, and it would save
their project. The trouble is, in order to translate something like all bachelor's are unmarried
into a logical truth, you need the notion of synonymy. You need to be able to say, well,
bachelor means the same as unmarried man. So you need a notion of synonymy. So in other words,
before you can explain necessary and a priori in terms of analyticity, you need to explain
analyticity in terms of synonymy. But it better not be the case that synonymy is relying on a
notion of necessity and a priori. Otherwise, you've still got the circle going on, and you haven't
explained any of them. It's a bit like there's a famous story about a dictionary that has a
definition of grass that says grass is the stuff that grazing animals eat. So suppose you want
to know, is wheat a grass? I better look up the definition of grass. So you look up the definition
of grass. Grass is what grazing animals eat. Have you learned what grass is yet? Well, it depends
on the definition of grazing. So you look up grazing and it says eating grass. You haven't
learned anything because it's circular. If the same thing is happening with analyticity and
necessity and a priori, a priori city, then none of them have been explained and they're empty
concepts, according to quite. Okay, so here's the suggestion. We can explain analyticity as logic
cultures or sentences that can be translated into logical truths. Well, the idea of translation
requires synonymy, because if you're going to translate one sentence into another, they have to
be synonymous. Okay, what's synonymy? Well, here's a promising suggestion for synonymy. Synonymy is
intersubstitutivity salva veritate. This is Leibniz's phrase. It means two phrases are are
synonymous. If for any sentence that is true, you can replace one of the phrases with the other
without affecting the truth value of the sentences. So all unmarried men are unmarried. Take out
unmarried man replaced by bachelor and you get all bachelor's unmarried. And it looks like you
don't change the truth value of the sentence. So it looks like, hey, we've got we've got something
here. We've got a standard for explaining synonymy, which we can then use to explain analyticity,
which we can use to explain these other two. The trouble is, as coin says, you've got to make a
distinction between sentences of what's called an extensional language, like logic, logic is an
extensional language. That is, extensional means, well, it just meaning is explained in terms of
reference. So for example, logic explains what green is, extensionally. So if you talk about a
predicate in logic, like green, all that there is to the predicate green is not some notion of
greenness, but rather all the green things. So what is the meaning of green in an extensional
language? It's all the green things. The trouble with that is two terms that we would say are not
synonymous, have the same extension, that is, the same group of objects are covered by them. So
according to an extensional theory, they mean the same. But renate, which means having kidneys and
coordinate, which means having a heart, are true of the same group of animals. All the animals that
are renate are coordinate. So this notion of synonymy would produce the result that renate is
synonymous with coordinate. And of course, it isn't. We know that renate and coordinate mean two
different things. Creature with a heart is different from creature with a kidneys. So this
would if this worked, it would solve the problem because this is an independent non circular
definition of synonymy. Trouble is, it doesn't explain our concept of synonymy. Well, so you an
extensional language doesn't work. What about an intentional language? Extensional intentional, it's
like the distinction like Frager's distinction between sense and reference. Reference is
extensional, sense is intentional. Well, intentional languages like English, English is
intentional, have these contexts called modal contexts that use like it is necessary that. So if
we're allowed to use intersubstitutivity into intentional languages, then renate and coordinate
are not intersubstitutional salva veritate. Because it is not true, it is true that it is
necessary that all coordinates are coordinate. That's true. But if you take out coordinate and
replace it with renate, it is not true that it is necessary that all renates are coordinate. Because
it's possible, we can imagine an animal with a heart but no kidneys. There aren't any in the real
world, which is what an extensional language deals with, but we can imagine one possibly. So this,
if we're allowed to use intentional concepts, then not only does synonymy is intersubstitutivity
salva veritate appear to give an independent definition of, of analyticity, which we need. But
it also appears to match our notion, our intuitive notion of synonymy, because it says, it says the
bachelor and unmarried man are synonymous, but renate and coordinate aren't, gives the right
results. But of course, it uses the notion of necessity, which is supposedly being explained by
analyticity. So it's circular. So you're, you face a dilemma in trying to explain synonymy. Either
you come up with this version of synonymy that doesn't match what we want it to, which Quine is
going to say, actually, that's your best bet. This, if we're going to use the notion of synonymy, this
is the best you can do, which is going to produce some very radical effects that is related to as
indeterminacy of translation, as we'll see in a second. Or you, you try and get it closer to our
intuitive notion, but then you've still got the circle. So consequently, we should abandon this
analytic-synthetic distinction. We cannot make a clear distinction. Now, Grace and Strawson, whom
we've come across, this is Paul Grace and Peter Strawson, or HP Grace and PF Strawson, as they're
usually known, who are part of the ordinary language school, which is flourishing in Oxford at the
same time that Quine is writing. Now, the ordinary language school in Oxford is influenced by the
later Wittgenstein. The later Wittgenstein of the philosophical investigations in the Blue and
Brown books and various others rejects most of what the early Wittgenstein of the Traktatus says.
But it's the early Wittgenstein of the Traktatus who is very influential on the logical positivists. So
if you follow all that, you can see that Grace and Strawson are no fans of logical positivism. However,
they retain these claims of logical positivism, because even though they reject the verificationist
theory of meaning, and for example, Grace has his account of meaning in terms of Uttara's intentions,
and in general, they talk about meaning as something that humans do. That's Strawson's notion of
referring rather than denoting, where Russell talks about denoting, which is what sentences do.
Strawson talks about referring, which is what people do. So they're no fans of logical positivism,
and yet they do share these two claims. I'm drawing on the work of Scott Somes in saying this. In fact,
I'm presenting you Scott Somes' analysis from his book on analytic philosophy.
I'll say a little bit about his suggestion for an alternative version of synonymy that appears to
not rely on necessity, and therefore might appear to dodge the circle. We can talk about that in a
minute. But anyway, Grace and Strawson write this famous paper, A Defense of a Dogma, and the dogma
they're talking about is the first one, the analytic-synthetic distinction. Because when
Quine produces this argument against analytic-synthetic distinction, it's incredibly radical,
because this is a distinction that it has been agreed on for hundreds of years, and hundreds of
very different philosophers, the empiricists and the rationalists, have agreed on this distinction,
that you can distinguish clearly between analytic truths and synthetic truths. It's just
there's an obvious and very useful distinction. And they say, look, so now all you've done, Quine,
is you've shown at best what you've shown is that you can't define analytic without using
necessary or vice versa, and the same for a priori-city. In other words, they're sort of in
a circle. But just because you can't define them without getting out of a circle doesn't mean
that there aren't obvious examples of analytic truths and obvious examples of necessary truths.
So maybe we can't define them, but we can point to, okay, I can't give a good definition of it,
but I know that that's one and that's the other. This is very similar to a classic quote from a
Supreme Court justice, where a case came up about whether a particular piece of artwork was art or
pornography. And if it's art, it's protected by the First Amendment, and if it's pornography,
it's not protected. So you need to be able to distinguish between art and pornography. Both
of them can involve nudity, both of them can involve depicting sex acts. So how do you distinguish
it? And famously, the Supreme Court justice says, I know it when I see it. So what he's saying is
exactly what Gries and Strawson are saying, even if we can't give a good definition of it, that
doesn't mean there isn't a difference. I know that that's pornography and that's art. I know that
that's analytic and that's synthetic. And they point to not just the fact that there has been
consistent usage of these, but also that you can teach them to students and say this is an analytic
and this is synthetic. Got it now? Okay, and then you can give them new examples that they haven't
encountered before, and they all sort them into the same groups. So clearly, they have mastered
a concept that they can apply to novel instances, and they all reproduce the same results, which is
good evidence that it's a genuine concept. Because if it was just made up bullshit,
then they would be getting it ran, they wouldn't get the same distinctions, they would just
process them randomly. But they have mastered something. And of course, this is very important
if you believe as the later Wittgenstein did, and so Gries and Strawson were influenced by that,
that meaning is use. If they can use it in the same way, then it is a meaningful distinction.
And the other point that they make is that if you get rid of the notion of synonymy,
as Quine is doing here, as part of his attack on analyticity,
this is much more radical than Quine lets on in two dogmas, because it appears to undermine
the very notion of meaning itself. Because if you can't say, what is it to say that
two things are synonymous, they mean the same. If there is no notion of synonymy,
then there is no notion of means the same as. And if there's no notion of means the same as,
then we can't say what something means. Because if we could say what something means,
then there would be a notion of means the same as. Because if we can say what this means,
what this means, then we could explain synonymy in the terms of, well those things both mean
the same. So if we haven't got synonymy, that shows that we can't have meaning, because if we
did have meaning, we'd have synonymy. So if there's no synonymy, there is no meaning, and that's just
absurd, say Gries and Strawson. So there must be something wrong with your argument attacking
this distinction, quine. Well, hold my beer, says quine, except he didn't, because that
cliche hadn't come up then. And quine's more of a martini drinker. He was a pretty heavy drinker,
I'm told, but yeah, it would have been martinis. I mean, he's picked your quine as the madman
era. He was very much into wearing suits and drinking martinis. Anyway,
after, so two dogmas comes out early 50s, this comes out as a response. And then in 1960,
quine publishes Word and Object, where he makes clear his theory of indeterminacy of translation.
We'll talk about that in a little bit. But let me just, before we leave this
attack on the first dogma, Somes, in the chapter where he's talking about the first
chapter, where the chapter where he's talking about this dogma, he suggests quine has ignored a
possible definition of synonymy. Instead of using the context, it is necessary that, which of course
relies on necessary and maintains the circle, you could say x believes that. So for example,
the other thing with it is necessary that is some necessary truths don't appear to be
the analytic truths, because analytic truths appear to be narrower than necessary truth. Now,
in saying this, Somes is denying that analyticity and necessity match up exactly. So he's abandoning
these. And the reason why quine didn't consider this is because he and the positivists basically
shared these assumptions. But what Somes is suggesting is that if we give up the idea that
analyticity and necessity perfectly match up, then we can come up with a definition in terms of
believes that. I should give some context here. Quine publishes where an object in 1960. Quine
basically rules the 60s, but in 1970, Kripke comes on the scene and Kripke in the lectures
that he gives in 1970 that are published in 1980 as the book naming a necessity,
gives an account of necessity that marks it as completely independent from analyticity and
a priori. And in fact, Kripke argues that they don't line up neatly and argues that you can have
a posteriori necessary truths. So that goes across the divide. Like, for example,
Hesperus is phosphorus. That is, the morning star, the thing that the Greeks named Hesperus,
which is the evening star, is the same thing that the Greeks named phosphorus, which is the
morning star. They're both the planet Venus. That is something that has to be learned a posteriori.
You can't know that a priori without experience. And yet it is a necessary truth according to
Kripke's account. And Kripke's account was very influential and Somes clearly agrees with it.
So it's no problem if we end up with a concept of analyticity that is narrower than necessity.
Now, he says X believes blank. So if, is it true that X believes that renate,
that, you know, X believes that renates are renate? That's true. X believes that renates
are chordate. That's false. So that produces the right result that renate and chordate are not
synonymous. But the trouble with this is, if we allow X believes that, these are called
propositional attitude contexts, it will remove a lot of the truths of mathematics from being
analytic truths. And it will also remove anything interesting as an analytic truth because X is
only going to believe that, you know, something is substituted, you're only going to get exactly
the same result in these contexts for things that the average person can instantly see are the same.
So in other words, you're not even going to get like two to the power eight and 256 as
synonymous, because not everybody can understand that. So they don't, they understand 256, but
they won't know that that's replaceable in all instances with two to the power eight.
So this is going to produce a much narrower range of analytic truths. And as the positivists
wanted to reserve a lot of interesting and surprising analytic truths as the province of
philosophy, all of those would kind of disappear under this version of analyticity and philosophy,
the role that was set aside for philosophy would just vanish under this definition.
Okay, dogma number two, the second of the two dogmas of empiricism, radical reductionism.
And it's very much related to the idea of synthetic truths. So a synthetic truth
is one that can be falsified by experience. Now, this will include a lot of the generalizations
of science, which are not necessarily immediately falsifiable. So obviously, testable synthetic
propositions are, you know, that that dog is brown, because you can go and examine the dog
closely to see what color it is. But generalizations of science, f equals ma are going to require
a set of other conditions that specify the appropriate conditions for experimentally
testing them. And it's only when you add all of those assumptions to the claim f equals ma
that you that it becomes testable. However, what what the positivists thought is that basically
you could take a synthetic claim, add a bunch of other analytic claims. So have the synthetic
claim plus a bunch of other things. And it will logically imply something that if we can observe
the negation of that, then that will falsify the synthetic claim. And because it can be falsified
or confirmed, it is a synthetic truth, it is susceptible to being tested by experience.
So someone like air would say, and this is again taken from Somes, experience is relevant to the
confirmation of individual synthetic but not analytic sentences. Now, Quine says, Quine points out
that the logical positivists are the heirs of the empiricists, the British empiricists like
Locke, Barkley and Hume. And the British empiricist says the meanings of individual terms are our
sensory experiences. So something like red is explained in terms of our sensory experiences.
What the logical positivists did that was an advance on those 18th century thinkers is say that
it's not the individual words that are testable, that are the meaning of which we learn from our
experience, it's sentences. And that's important, because an obvious problem for empiricists is
what about words that don't talk about the world, what about and and or and things like that. If
you're going to say to be meaningful, they have to be susceptible, they have to be testable by
experience, what do you do with that? So the logical positivists and under the influence of
someone like Russell have come up with ways to explain the meanings, an extra way to explain the
meanings, role that they play in in sentences. But still, the unit of meaning is the sentence.
So according to the logical positivists, words have meaning merely because of the role they play
in a sentence. And if you remember Russell's theory of descriptions said that his analysis of a
definite description like the king of France didn't have meaning by itself in abstraction,
because it doesn't actually pick out anything in the real world. It only had meaning when it you
put it in a sentence. So in other words, the meaning of a term is acquired from the sentence.
It's the sentence that is the vehicle of meaning. Quine says good advance logical positivists on
going from words as the unit of meaning to sentences as the unit of meaning, but you didn't go far
enough. In fact, the unit of meaning is not individual sentences. It's our entire theory of
the world. That is the thing that's meaningful and sentences insofar as they're meaningful
acquire that meaning in the context of the entire theory. So just as the positivists said
words acquire meaning in the context of a sentence. So Quine says sentences acquire meaning in the
context of the theory itself. This is part of his holism, which I'm going to explain in a bit more
detail. All right. So Ayer says experience the relevance to the confirmation of individual
synthetic but not analytic sentences. Quine, of course, has said that we can't make this
distinction. And in fact, it is it is never experienced is never relevant to the confirmation
of individual sentences. Experiences relevant to the confirmation of the total theory. So we have
a total theory of the world that makes predictions about the world. And experience is relevant to
the confirmation of that, but not to individual sentences. What does he mean? Well, you might
think, okay, look, I can imagine a must be right, because think of a synthetic sentence like,
I don't know, that dog is brown or whatever. Surely that is confirmable or deniable by sensory
experience going over and looking at the damn dog. Surely that will determine whether or not
that individual sentence by itself is true or false. Quine says no, it's not that simple,
because our experience now, except in very rare sentences. Actually, here's Quine says that there
are. So there are sentences that are like what Ayer says, are all synthetic sentences. They're
called observation sentences. And they're very specific. And they're at the sort of periphery
of our theory. Quine has this analogy that our theory is like an upturned bowl. Actually,
he uses the analogy of web, where if you take a bowl and you turn upside down, and the edge of
the bowl is where our theory of the world interacts with the world. So the world is the table, the
bowl is our theory of it. There's an edge where they interact. And that is observation sentences,
where they are directly confirmable or deniable. But they are very specific and very narrow.
They wouldn't even be things like there is a brown dog there. They would be,
depending on your theory, they would be having a certain kind of experience.
So, you know, having read, actually, Quine disagrees with the classic empiricist because
he's a Gestalt empiricist. He doesn't believe that we have like 2D experiences. We can have
3D experiences at once. So he disagrees in the content of sensory input. But he does agree
that observation sentences are confirmed or denied by our sensory experience.
Okay, the vast majority of all of our statements are going to be not observation sentences.
They're going to be part of the bowl. At the top of the bowl, at the most furthest removed from the
edge, are our most theoretic sentences, like Aristotle's Laws of Thought, like the Law of
Non-Contradiction. Now, Quine thinks that any non-observation sentence, which is the vast
majority of them, can be held true or can be rejected on the basis of any experience.
What the hell is he talking about? Well, here is an example that is making a slightly different
point. But I've always loved this example because it's a really good illustration of why it is
that sensory experience isn't directly relevant to specific claims. It's relevant to a bunch of
claims, any one of which we can choose to reject. We are not forced to say, okay, that experience
made us reject that statement. That experience might be definitely inconsistent with our current
theory, but we can make our current theory consistent with that experience by changing
any one of a number of claims within our theory, not necessarily that that isn't a brown dot.
And this example is due to a philosopher of science called Imri Lakatos.
The story is about an imaginary case of planetary misbehavior. A physicist of the
pre-Einsteinian era takes Newton mechanics and his Law of Gravitation, the accepted initial
conditions, and calculates with their help the path of a newly discovered small planet.
But, so he says, according to Newton's science, the planet should move like this. It doesn't.
Now, you might say, okay, we have to change something. Now, already you could say, well,
do I change my theory? Do I reject Newton's theory and look for a new one like Einstein's,
or do I assume that I've measured it wrong? Well, actually, those aren't your only choices.
But the planet deviates from the calculated path. Does our Newtonian physicist consider that the
deviation was forbidden by Newton's theory and therefore that once established it refutes Newton's
theory? No. He suggests that there must be a hitherto unknown planet, P star, which perturbs
the path of P, the original planet. He calculates the mass orbit, etc., of this hypothetical
planet, and then asks an experimental astronomer to test his hypothesis. The planet P star is so
small that even the biggest available telescopes cannot possibly observe it. The experimental
astronomer applies for a search grant to build yet a bigger one. In three years' time, the new
telescope is ready. Were the unknown planet P star to be discovered, it would be held as a new
victory of Newtonian science? But it is not. Does our scientist abandon Newton's theory and his
idea of the perturbing planet? No. He suggests that a cloud of cosmic dust hides the planet from
Earth's. He calculates the location and property of this cloud and asks for a search grant to send a
satellite to test his calculation. You can see that this goes on and on. In other words,
what he's doing is he's making a decision which of his sentences about the external world to hold
true and which to revise. He is unwilling to reject Newtonian science despite evidence that
appears to contradict it. And that's perfectly okay according to Quine because you cannot say
that some of the sentences are synthetic and have to be the ones that are revised,
and some are analytic. Any sentence can be revised according to experience. Even
classic examples of analytic sentences like you can't have P and not P, the law of non-contradiction.
Quine points out, and this was actually a legitimate argument, that some discoveries of
quantum mechanics appear to threaten the law of non-contradiction. Like in the two-slit experiment,
electrons appear to be in two places at once. The same electron appears to be in two places at once.
What do we decide? We could say, well, it's possible for something to both be and not be in a place
like Schrodinger's Cat and all that stuff. And so that is a possible conclusion we could draw.
We could say, given this experimental result, the two-slit experiment, we can revise one of our
most central, isolated from experience is sentences about the world that the logical
positivists would have called analytic and therefore true by definition and immune to revision.
There is no such thing, says Quine. Everything can be revised. Any non-observation sentence can
be held true. Any changes, so analytic sentences can be held true in face of all evidence. So they
would say no evidence. Someone like Ayer would say no evidence would cause us to reject the law of
contradiction, non-contradiction. But Quine said no. Any sentence, even ones that you regard as
synthetic can be held true. What are our guidelines in deciding which sentences to reject or hold
true, like in the case of the planetary observation? They're pragmatic. They're entirely pragmatic
considerations. We try and minimize the damage to our theory. Now, if enough observations happen
that are inconsistent with our theory, then to make our theory consistent with the observations,
we will have to make central changes to our theory. But what we do is we try and we make
pragmatic considerations about which to give up, which is exactly what that scientist was doing
in the case of the planet. He's saying, shall I give up my theory of the path of the planet,
which requires rejecting Newton's physics, or shall I give up my theory that there wasn't
another planet affecting them, which was an assumption? Shall I reject that assumption?
So, Quine has the theory of the web of belief that our entire theory of the world is interconnected
statements that we try and maintain consistency among, but our goal is to produce a theory that
takes input, which is sensory because he's an empiricist, and produces the output of predictions
about future experiences. Our goal is to maintain peak success in this. But what do we do in the face
of evidence that appears to contradict claims within our total theory? Well, we make changes
that minimize the damage to our theory or keep the theory simple and powerful.
Indeterminacy of translation. This is another core argument of Quine's that isn't talked about
in two dogmas of empiricism, but it's worth mentioning because it's one of the key claims
of Quine's that made him such a radical and interesting philosopher. The indeterminacy
of translation is sort of, as I said, Quine saying, in response to critics like Grayson
Strawson saying, your attack on synonymy is an attack on meaning, Quine says, well, yeah,
there is no such thing as synonymy, and let's do a little thought experiment that illustrates
the real situation we're in. Quine is a behaviorist. Now, not a behaviorist in the sense of skinner,
behavioral psychology, although he probably was at the time because skinnerian psychology was
in the air. But what he definitely is to his dying day was a behaviorist about language learning.
Now, in this, he differs from Chomsky. Chomsky, of course, famously says we're hardwired.
Chomsky is like the descendant of the rationalists who say that certain things are known a priori.
Chomsky would basically say, yeah, our language talent is hardwired into us. We don't require
experience to acquire that skill. It's already there. And so there's this sort of underlying
structure that all languages share. Quine is going to reject that. He's a classic empiricist who says
we're blank-sates, we acquire information. Except in that he's a naturalist, he says if
science chose that that's true, he would have to accept that. But he is a behaviorist about
language acquisition. And we'll see the importance of that in his indeterminacy of translation.
So what is indeterminacy of translation? Well, the most famous illustration of this is in Word
and Object. And it involves a term that Quine invented, which is gather guy.
So remember, Quine is a behaviorist, certainly about language acquisition. And he says,
and he asks us to imagine a field linguist. This is kind of the linguists equivalent of
Indiana Jones. What the field linguist has to do is parachute into a remote area where we've
discovered a previously undiscovered tribe who speak a language that has never been exposed to
the outside world. And the field linguist's job is to visit this tribe and come away with a translation
manual that can translate anything that they say into English, let's say. This is a good analogy
for essentially any language acquisition. Because on Quine on empiricist assumptions,
we come into the world without language, and we have to acquire language. So
if that is possible, it certainly must be possible for a field linguist who is someone who already
has a language to acquire a different language, this isolated tribes language. Okay, so the field
linguist parachutes in. And how does he go about this? How does he go about learning the language?
Well, all he can do if you're an empiricist, or the only evidence he's got to go on
for the meanings of the words that he hears is empirical and is sensory input. So it involves
pointing at things and looking at the reaction of speakers of this language. Now Quine kind of
cheats a little, because he says the linguist already knows what gestures are affirmation
and denial. So what he can do then is test hypotheses about the meanings of words in exactly the way
that a scientist tests hypotheses about any theory he has by looking at the evidence,
because you know, everything is like is science in in Quine's terms. So a rabbit hops by and
the natives, one of the native's points at the rabbit and says gavagai. Okay, now you might think
great. Now, our field linguist knows that gavagai is rabbit, not so fast. First of all,
it's only going to he's only going to acquire the language sentences at a time because sentences
are the kind of things that are have truth value that can be affirmed or denied. So gavagai could
be just an abbreviated sentence, just like a single word, or it could itself be an entire sentence.
So that's one complication. But the other complication is indeterminacy of reference, that is.
Well, before I get to that, the how would you confirm how would our field linguist confirm
that gavagai means rabbit? Well, you can't just take one instance and assume that means rabbit,
because of course, there are many alternatives that are consistent with the evidence that he
now has. So so far, he's got a piece of evidence, which is a native pointing at a rabbit and saying
gavagai. That is consistent with a whole bunch of translation manuals. It you could translate
gavagai as rabbit, you could translate gavagai as complete sentence, that's a rabbit.
Gavagai could be the name of that specific rabbit. Gavagai could be oh, there goes lunch.
Gavagai could be my kids let his pet out again. All of these are entirely consistent with the
evidence that we've got so far. Now, presumably, it should be possible for the trans the field
linguist to narrow it down to eliminate many of these possibilities. What quines thesis is
essentially that well, however many eliminates, there is still going to be and literally an
infinite number of interpretations of the language translation manuals of the language
that are consistent with the all the information that he's acquired, but that are contradictory
to each other. So in other words, you can get at least, let's say just two, two translation
manuals, each of which is equally confirmed by the evidence, which includes, of course,
the only evidence we've got so far is this one piece of evidence pointing at a rabbit and saying
Gavagai, you could have two translation manuals that are consistent with all not only all the
evidence that the field man linguist ever acquires, but that the field linguist could acquire.
It is still going to be the case that you have two translation manuals that are inconsistent
with each other, but entirely consistent within with the effect with the facts, which of them is
the right one. Quine says, that's an empty question. There is no such thing as the right one,
which is obviously something like what Gries and Struessen were afraid of because we want to say,
well, look, their language means something. And if it means something, it can't mean both of these
things because they're inconsistent with each other. So Quine would say, then let's drop the
notion of meaning. Both of these work. Our theory of the world is about what works. And so each of
these, we could, we can choose between each of these by pragmatic terms. If this one is easier
to use than this one, let's pick this one. Does this mean that one's true? No, it just means it's
easier for us to use. Now, what kind of things would we do to eliminate alternatives? Like,
obviously, you think, well, look, there's going to be evidence that eliminates
Gavagai as the name of that one particular rabbit. You find another rabbit and you point to the other
rabbit and presumably, again, this assumes that we know how to ask a question. It assumes that,
you know, questions go up at the end of the sentence. We don't know that in this other person's
language. So these are even more difficulties that Quine doesn't get into. But suppose you can say,
point in another rabbit and say, Gavagai. And if they say yes, then that appears to eliminate the
claim that Gavagai is a proper name because they can't both be Gavagai. So it looks like we can
do more and more of this. And finally, narrow it down. But what Quine points out with a thesis
called indeterminacy of reference is there are some things that we can never eliminate,
such as Gavagai could mean rabbit or it could mean undetached rabbit part because
wherever it's a bit like the Renate Cordate problem, every time you're pointing at a rabbit,
you're pointing at an undetached rabbit part. So every time it's true to say that he is referring
to a rabbit, it is true to say that he is referring to an undetached rabbit part and every time it's
false of one, it's false of the other. So in other words, they're like extensionally equivalent.
And given that we have to be a behaviorist in language acquisition because we're not telepathic,
the only thing that we have to go on in learning a language is the evidence. And if the evidence
cannot decide between two inconsistent translation manuals, then there is indeterminacy of translation.
You cannot say one is the correct one. And of course, there's examples that you might say,
illustrate this, in that there are genuinely inconsistent translations of, say, the Bible.
The further away from us a language is written in, the greater leeway there is in translating
in what's the correct translation of it. But it's worse than that because
Quine says indeterminacy of translation happens within a language. I am translating what you mean
by your words into what makes sense for me. And somebody else could take by your words
you to mean something inconsistent with what I take it. And both of them are consistent with
the evidence. And we can't say that one of them is wrong. And the other one is right. So
this is a very radical kind of skepticism about notion of meaning as we normally understand
it. We're replacing meaning with some kind of behaviorist stand in that doesn't do what we
think meaning should. But Quine says, if we're honest, this is the best we can do. And this brought
a storm of criticism and commentary on Quine, which is one of the reasons he's so famous,
because he's making radical claims. He's also pretty cool. Everybody should go through a Quine
phase of thinking that Quine's right about something. Now, most philosophers, there aren't
many Quineans left, probably, maybe not as few as there are logical positivists left, but he still
has his defenders. And but his his view has, he's not sort of as current as he was in the mid
century. In the mid century, everybody was talking if they weren't agreeing with Quine, they were
disagreeing with Quine, they were talking about Quine. So that's why I have to know about him.
He was such an important figure.